--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 4  The Relational Model 149
Chapter 5   Relational Algebra and Relational  
Calculus 167
Chapter 6  SQL: Data Manipulation 191
Chapter  7 SQL: Data Definition 233
Chapter 8  Advanced SQL 271
Chapter 9  Object-Relational DBMSs 291 
PART
2
The Relational Model  
and Languages
147
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   147 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 2 ---
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   148 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 3 ---
ChAPTeR
4 The Relational Model
Chapter Objectives
In this chapter you will learn:
•	 The	origins	of	the	relational	model.
•	 The	terminology	of	the	relational	model.
•	 How	tables	are	used	to	represent	data.
•	 The	connection	between	mathematical	relations	and	relations	in	the	relational	model.
•	 Properties	of	database	relations.
•	 How	to	identify	candidate,	primary,	alternate,	and	foreign	keys.
•	 The	meaning	of	entity	integrity	and	referential	integrity.
•	 The	purpose	and	advantages	of	views	in	relational	systems.
The Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) has become the domi-
nant data-processing software in use today, with an estimated total software 
revenue worldwide of US$24 billion in 2011 and estimated to grow to about 
US$37 billion by 2016. This software represents the second generation of DBMSs 
and is based on the relational data model proposed by E. F. Codd (1970). In the 
relational model, all data is logically structured within relations (tables). Each 
relation has a name and is made up of named attributes (columns) of data. Each 
tuple (row) contains one value per attribute. A great strength of the relational 
model is this simple logical structure. Yet behind this simple structure is a sound 
theoretical foundation that is lacking in the first generation of DBMSs (the net-
work and hierarchical DBMSs).
We devote a significant amount of this book to the RDBMS, in recognition 
of the importance of these systems. In this chapter, we discuss the terminology 
and basic structural concepts of the relational data model. In the next chapter,  
we examine the relational languages that can be used for update and data 
retrieval.
149
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   149 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 4 ---
150 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
Structure of this Chapter To put our treatment of the RDBMS into 
perspective, in Section 4.1 we provide a brief history of the relational model. 
In Section 4.2 we discuss the underlying concepts and terminology of the rela-
tional model. In Section 4.3 we discuss the relational integrity rules, including 
entity integrity and referential integrity. In Section 4.4 we introduce the con-
cept of views, which are important features of relational DBMSs, although not a 
concept of the relational model per se.
Looking ahead, in Chapters 5–9 we examine SQL (Structured Query 
Language), the formal and de facto standard language for RDBMSs, and in 
 Appendix M we examine QBE (Query-By-Example), another highly popular 
visual query language for RDBMSs. In Chapters 16–19 we present a complete 
methodology for relational database design. In Chapter 9, we discuss an ex-
tension to relational DBMSs to incorporate object-oriented features, and in 
particular examine the object-oriented features of SQL. In Appendix G, we 
examine Codd’s twelve rules, which form a yardstick against which RDBMS 
products can be identified. The examples in this chapter are drawn from 
the DreamHome case study, which is described in detail in Section 11.4 and 
 Appendix A.
4.1 Brief History of the Relational Model
The relational model was first proposed by E. F. Codd in his seminal paper “A 
relational model of data for large shared data banks” (Codd, 1970). This paper is 
now generally accepted as a landmark in database systems, although a set-oriented 
model had been proposed previously (Childs, 1968). The relational model’s objec-
tives were specified as follows:
•	 To allow a high degree of data independence. Application programs must not 
be affected by modifications to the internal data representation, particularly by 
changes to file organizations, record orderings, or access paths.
•	 To provide substantial grounds for dealing with data semantics, consistency, 
and redundancy problems. In particular, Codd’s paper introduced the concept 
of normalized relations, that is, relations that have no repeating groups. (The 
process of normalization is discussed in 14 and 15.)
•	 To enable the expansion of set-oriented data manipulation languages.
Although interest in the relational model came from several directions, the most 
significant research may be attributed to three projects with rather different per-
spectives. The first of these, at IBM’s San José Research Laboratory in California, 
was the prototype relational DBMS System R, which was developed during the late 
1970s (Astrahan et al., 1976). This project was designed to prove the  practicality 
of the relational model by providing an implementation of its data structures 
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   150 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 5 ---
4.1 Brief History of the Relational Model | 151
and operations. It also proved to be an excellent source of information about 
implementation concerns such as transaction management, concurrency control, 
recovery techniques, query optimization, data security and integrity, human fac-
tors, and user interfaces, and led to the publication of many research papers and 
to the development of other prototypes. In particular, the System R project led to 
two major developments:
•	 the development of a structured query language called SQL, which has since 
become the formal International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and de 
facto standard language for relational DBMSs;
•	 the production of various commercial relational DBMS products during the late 
1970s and the 1980s: for example, DB2 and SQL/DS from IBM and Oracle from 
Oracle Corporation.
The second project to have been significant in the development of the relational 
model was the INGRES (Interactive Graphics Retrieval System) project at the 
University of California at Berkeley, which was active at about the same time as 
the System R project. The INGRES project involved the development of a pro-
totype RDBMS, with the research concentrating on the same overall objectives 
as the System R project. This research led to an academic version of INGRES, 
which contributed to the general appreciation of relational concepts, and spawned 
the commercial products INGRES from Relational Technology Inc. (now Actian 
Corporation) and the Intelligent Database Machine from Britton Lee Inc.
The third project was the Peterlee Relational Test Vehicle at the IBM UK 
Scientific Centre in Peterlee (Todd, 1976). This project had a more theoretical 
orientation than the System R and INGRES projects and was significant, princi-
pally for research into such issues as query processing and optimization as well as 
functional extension.
Commercial systems based on the relational model started to appear in the late 
1970s and early 1980s. Now there are several hundred RDBMSs for both main-
frame and PC environments, even though many do not strictly adhere to the defi-
nition of the relational model. Examples of PC-based RDBMSs are Office Access 
and Visual FoxPro from Microsoft, InterBase from Embarcadero Technologies, and 
R:Base from R:Base Technologies.
Owing to the popularity of the relational model, many nonrelational systems now 
provide a relational user interface, irrespective of the underlying model. IDMS, the 
principal network DBMS, has become CA-IDMS from CA Inc. (formerly Computer 
Associates), supporting a relational view of data. Other mainframe DBMSs that 
support some relational features are Model 204 from Computer Corporation of 
America (a subsidiary of Rocket Software Inc) and Software AG’s ADABAS.
Some extensions to the relational model have also been proposed; for example, 
extensions to:
•	 capture more closely the meaning of data (for example, Codd, 1979);
•	 support object-oriented concepts (for example, Stonebraker and Rowe, 1986);
•	 support deductive capabilities (for example, Gardarin and Valduriez, 1989).
We discuss some of these extensions in Chapters 27–28, as we discuss Object 
DBMSs.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   151 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 6 ---
152 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
4.2 Terminology
The relational model is based on the mathematical concept of a relation, which is 
physically represented as a table. Codd, a trained mathematician, used terminology 
taken from mathematics, principally set theory and predicate logic. In this section 
we explain the terminology and structural concepts of the relational model.
4.2.1 Relational Data Structure
Relation A relation is a table with columns and rows.
An RDBMS requires only that the database be perceived by the user as tables. 
Note, however, that this perception applies only to the logical structure of the 
database: that is, the external and conceptual levels of the ANSI-SPARC archi-
tecture discussed in Section 2.1. It does not apply to the physical structure of the 
database, which can be implemented using a variety of storage structures (see 
Appendix F).
Attribute An attribute is a named column of a relation.
In the relational model, relations are used to hold information about the 
objects to be represented in the database. A relation is represented as a two-
dimensional table in which the rows of the table correspond to individual records 
and the table columns correspond to attributes. Attributes can appear in any 
order and the relation will still be the same relation, and therefore will convey 
the same meaning.
For example, the information on branch offices is represented by the 
Branch 
relation, with columns for attributes branchNo (the branch number), street, city, and 
postcode. Similarly, the information on staff is represented by the Staff relation, with 
columns for attributes staffNo (the staff number), fName, IName, position, sex, DOB 
(date of birth), salary, and branchNo (the number of the branch the staff member 
works at). Figure 4.1 shows instances of the Branch and Staff relations. As you can see 
from this example, a column contains values of a single attribute; for example, the 
branchNo columns contain only numbers of existing branch offices.
Domain A domain is the set of allowable values for one or more attributes.
Domains are an extremely powerful feature of the relational model. Every attrib-
ute in a relation is defined on a domain. Domains may be distinct for each attribute, 
or two or more attributes may be defined on the same domain. Figure 4.2 shows the 
domains for some of the attributes of the 
Branch and Staff relations. Note that at any 
given time, typically there will be values in a domain that do not currently appear 
as values in the corresponding attribute.
The domain concept is important, because it allows the user to define in a central 
place the meaning and source of values that attributes can hold. As a result, more 
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   152 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.2 Terminology | 153
information is available to the system when it undertakes the execution of a rela-
tional operation, and operations that are semantically incorrect can be avoided. For 
example, it is not sensible to compare a street name with a telephone number, even 
though the domain definitions for both these attributes are character strings. On the 
other hand, the monthly rental on a property and the number of months a prop-
erty has been leased have different domains (the first a monetary value, the second 
an integer value), but it is still a legal operation to multiply two values from these 
domains. As these two examples illustrate, a complete implementation of domains 
is not straightforward, and as a result, many RDBMSs do not support them fully.
postcode
SW1 4EH
AB2 3SU
G11 9QX
BS99 1NZ
NW10 6EU
city
London
Aberdeen
Glasgow
Bristol
London
22 Deer Rd
16 Argyll St
163 Main St
32 Manse Rd
56 Clover Dr
Attributes
DegreePrimary key
Staff
fName lName
SL21
SG37
SG14
SA9
SG5
SL41
John
Ann
David
Mary
Susan
Julie
Manager
Assistant
Supervisor
Assistant
Manager
Assistant
M
F
M
F
F
F
1-Oct-45
10-Nov-60
24-Mar-58
19-Feb-70
3-Jun-40
13-Jun-65
30000
12000
18000
9000
24000
9000
White
Beech
Ford
Howe
Brand
Lee
Foreign key
Relation Relation
Cardinality
B005
B007
B003
B004
B002
streetbranchNo
Branch
staffNo sex branchNo
B005
B003
B003
B007
B003
B005
salaryposition DOB
Figure 4.1 	
Instances	of	the	
Branch	and	Staff	
relations.
branchNo
street
city
postcode
sex
DOB
salary
character: size 4, range B001–B999
character: size 25
character: size 15
character: size 8
character: size 1, value M or F
date, range from 1-Jan-20,
format dd-mmm-yy
monetary: 7 digits, range
6000.00–40000.00
Attribute Domain Deﬁnition
/T_he set of  all possible branch numbers
/T_he set of  all street names in Britain
/T_he set of  all city names in Britain
/T_he set of  all postcodes in Britain
/T_he sex of  a person
Possible values of staﬀ birth dates
Possible values of staﬀ salaries
Meaning
BranchNumbers
StreetNames
CityNames
Postcodes
Sex
DatesOfBirth
Salaries
Domain Name Figure 4.2 	
Domains	for	
some	attributes	
of	the	Branch	and	
Staff	relations.
Tuple A tuple is a row of a relation.
The elements of a relation are the rows or tuples in the table. In the Branch rela-
tion, each row contains four values, one for each attribute. Tuples can appear in 
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   153 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 8 ---
154 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
any order and the relation will still be the same relation, and therefore convey the 
same meaning.
The structure of a relation, together with a specification of the domains and any 
other restrictions on possible values, is sometimes called its intension, which is usu-
ally fixed, unless the meaning of a relation is changed to include additional attrib-
utes. The tuples are called the extension (or state) of a relation, which changes 
over time.
Degree The degree of a relation is the number of attributes it contains.
The Branch relation in Figure 4.1 has four attributes or degree four. This means 
that each row of the table is a four-tuple, containing four values. A relation with only 
one attribute would have degree one and be called a unary relation or one-tuple. 
A relation with two attributes is called binary, one with three attributes is called 
ternary, and after that the term n-ary is usually used. The degree of a relation is a 
property of the intension of the relation.
Cardinality The cardinality of a relation is the number of tuples it contains.
By contrast, the number of tuples is called the cardinality of the relation and this 
changes as tuples are added or deleted. The cardinality is a property of the extension 
of the relation and is determined from the particular instance of the relation at any 
given moment. Finally, we define a relational database.
Relational database A collection of normalized relations with distinct relation 
names.
A relational database consists of relations that are appropriately structured. We 
refer to this appropriateness as normalization. We defer the discussion of normaliza-
tion until Chapters 14 and 15.
Alternative terminology
The terminology for the relational model can be quite confusing. We have intro-
duced two sets of terms. In fact, a third set of terms is sometimes used: a relation 
may be referred to as a file, the tuples as records, and the attributes as fields. This 
terminology stems from the fact that, physically, the RDBMS may store each rela-
tion in a file. Table 4.1 summarizes the different terms for the relational model.
TABLe 4.1 Alternative	terminology	for	relational	model	terms.
FORMAL TeRMS ALTeRNATIVe  1 ALTeRNATIVe  2
Relation Table File
Tuple Row Record
Attribute Column Field
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   154 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 9 ---
4.2.2 Mathematical Relations
To understand the true meaning of the term relation, we have to review some con-
cepts from mathematics. Suppose that we have two sets, D 1 and D2, where D1 5 {2, 
4} and D2 5 {1, 3, 5}. The Cartesian product of these two sets, written D 1 3 D2, is 
the set of all ordered pairs such that the first element is a member of D 1 and the 
second element is a member of D 2. An alternative way of expressing this is to find 
all combinations of elements with the first from D 1 and the second from D 2. In our 
case, we have:
D1 3 D2 5 {(2, 1), (2, 3), (2, 5), (4, 1), (4, 3), (4, 5)}
Any subset of this Cartesian product is a relation. For example, we could produce 
a relation R such that:
R 5 {(2, 1), (4, 1)}
We may specify which ordered pairs will be in the relation by giving some condition 
for their selection. For example, if we observe that R includes all those ordered pairs 
in which the second element is 1, then we could write R as:
R 5 {(x, y) | x ∈ D1, y ∈ D2, and y 5 1}
Using these same sets, we could form another relation S in which the first element 
is always twice the second. Thus, we could write S as:
S 5 {(x, y) | x ∈ D
1, y ∈ D2, and x 5 2y}
or, in this instance,
S 5 {(2, 1)}
as there is only one ordered pair in the Cartesian product that satisfies this condi-
tion. We can easily extend the notion of a relation to three sets. Let D 1, D2, and D3 
be three sets. The Cartesian product D1 3 D2 3 D3 of these three sets is the set of all 
ordered triples such that the first element is from D1, the second element is from D2, 
and the third element is from D3. Any subset of this Cartesian product is a relation. 
For example, suppose we have:
D1 5 {l, 3}  D2 5 {2, 4}  D3 5 {5, 6}
D1 3 D2 3 D3 5 {(1, 2, 5), (1, 2, 6), (1, 4, 5), (1, 4, 6), (3, 2, 5), (3, 2, 6), (3, 4, 5), (3, 4,6)}
Any subset of these ordered triples is a relation. We can extend the three sets and 
define a general relation on n domains. Let D1, D2, . . . , Dn be n sets. Their Cartesian 
product is defined as:
D1 3 D2 3 . . . 3 Dn 5 {(d1, d2, . . . , dn)|d1 ∈ D1, d2 ∈ D2, . . . , dn ∈ Dn}
and is usually written as:
  n
 D1
 i51
Any set of n-tuples from this Cartesian product is a relation on the n sets. Note that 
in defining these relations we have to specify the sets, or domains, from which we 
choose values.
4.2 Terminology | 155
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   155 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 10 ---
156 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
4.2.3 Database Relations
Applying the previously discussed concepts to databases, we can define a relation 
schema.
Relation 
schema 
A named relation defined by a set of attribute and domain name 
pairs.
Let A1, A2, . . . , An be attributes with domains D1, D2, . . . , Dn. Then the set {A1:D1, 
A2:D2, . . . , A n:Dn} is a relation schema. A relation R defined by a relation schema S  
is a set of mappings from the attribute names to their corresponding domains. 
Thus, relation R is a set of n-tuples:
(A1:d1, A2:d2, . . . , An:dn) such that d1 ∈ D 1, d2 ∈ D 2, . . . , dn ∈ D n
Each element in the n -tuple consists of an attribute and a value for that attribute. 
Normally, when we write out a relation as a table, we list the attribute names as  column 
headings and write out the tuples as rows having the form (d1, d2, . . . , dn), where each 
value is taken from the appropriate domain. In this way, we can think of a relation 
in the relational model as any subset of the Cartesian product of the domains of the 
attributes. A table is simply a physical representation of such a  relation.
In our example, the Branch relation shown in Figure 4.1 has attributes branchNo, 
street, city, and postcode, each with its corresponding domain. The Branch relation 
is any subset of the Cartesian product of the domains, or any set of four-tuples in 
which the first element is from the domain BranchNumbers, the second is from the 
domain StreetNames, and so on. One of the four-tuples is:
{(B005, 22 Deer Rd, London, SW1 4EH)}
or more correctly:
{(branchNo: B005, street: 22 Deer Rd, city: London, postcode: SW1 4EH)}
We refer to this as a relation instance. The Branch table is a convenient way of writ-
ing out all the four-tuples that form the relation at a specific moment in time, which 
explains why table rows in the relational model are called “tuples”. In the same way 
that a relation has a schema, so too does the relational database.
Relational database 
schema 
A set of relation schemas, each with a distinct name.
If R1, R2, . . . , R n are a set of relation schemas, then we can write the relational 
database schema, or simply relational schema, R, as:
R = {R1, R2, . . . , Rn}
4.2.4 Properties of Relations
A relation has the following properties:
•	 the relation has a name that is distinct from all other relation names in the rela-
tional schema;
•	 each cell of the relation contains exactly one atomic (single) value;
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   156 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 11 ---
4.2 Terminology | 157
•	 each attribute has a distinct name;
•	 the values of an attribute are all from the same domain;
•	 each tuple is distinct; there are no duplicate tuples;
•	 the order of attributes has no significance;
•	 the order of tuples has no significance, theoretically. (However, in practice, the 
order may affect the efficiency of accessing tuples.)
To illustrate what these restrictions mean, consider again the Branch relation 
shown in Figure 4.1. Because each cell should contain only one value, it is illegal 
to store two postcodes for a single branch office in a single cell. In other words, 
relations do not contain repeating groups. A relation that satisfies this property 
is said to be normalized or in first normal form. (Normal forms are discussed in 
chapters 14 and 15.)
The column names listed at the tops of columns correspond to the attributes 
of the relation. The values in the 
branchNo attribute are all from the BranchNumbers 
domain; we should not allow a postcode value to appear in this column. There can be 
no duplicate tuples in a relation. For example, the row (B005, 22 Deer Rd, London, 
SW1 4EH) appears only once.
Provided that an attribute name is moved along with the attribute values, we can 
interchange columns. The table would represent the same relation if we were to 
put the 
city attribute before the postcode attribute, although for readability it makes 
more sense to keep the address elements in the normal order. Similarly, tuples can 
be interchanged, so the records of branches B005 and B004 can be switched and 
the relation will still be the same.
Most of the properties specified for relations result from the properties of math-
ematical relations:
•	 When we derived the Cartesian product of sets with simple, single-valued ele-
ments such as integers, each element in each tuple was single-valued. Similarly, 
each cell of a relation contains exactly one value. However, a mathematical rela-
tion need not be normalized. Codd chose to disallow repeating groups to simplify 
the relational data model.
•	 In a relation, the possible values for a given position are determined by the set, 
or domain, on which the position is defined. In a table, the values in each col-
umn must come from the same attribute domain.
•	 In a set, no elements are repeated. Similarly, in a relation, there are no dupli-
cate tuples.
•	 Because a relation is a set, the order of elements has no significance. Therefore, 
in a relation, the order of tuples is immaterial.
However, in a mathematical relation, the order of elements in a tuple is important. 
For example, the ordered pair (1, 2) is quite different from the ordered pair (2, 1). 
This is not the case for relations in the relational model, which specifically requires 
that the order of attributes be immaterial. The reason is that the column headings 
define which attribute the value belongs to. This means that the order of column 
headings in the intension is immaterial, but once the structure of the relation is 
chosen, the order of elements within the tuples of the extension must match the 
order of attribute names.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   157 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 12 ---
158 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
4.2.5 Relational Keys
As stated earlier, there are no duplicate tuples within a relation. Therefore, we need 
to be able to identify one or more attributes (called relational keys) that uniquely 
identifies each tuple in a relation. In this section, we explain the terminology used 
for relational keys.
Superkey An attribute, or set of attributes, that uniquely identifies a tuple 
within a relation.
A superkey uniquely identifies each tuple within a relation. However, a superkey 
may contain additional attributes that are not necessary for unique identification, 
and we are interested in identifying superkeys that contain only the minimum num-
ber of attributes necessary for unique identification.
Candidate 
key
A superkey such that no proper subset is a superkey within the 
 relation.
A candidate key K for a relation R has two properties:
•	 Uniqueness. In each tuple of R, the values of K uniquely identify that tuple.
•	 Irreducibility. No proper subset of K has the uniqueness property.
There may be several candidate keys for a relation. When a key consists of more 
than one attribute, we call it a composite key. Consider the Branch relation shown 
in Figure 4.1. Given a value of city, we can determine several branch offices (for 
example, London has two branch offices). This attribute cannot be a candidate 
key. On the other hand, because DreamHome allocates each branch office a unique 
branch number, given a branch number value, branchNo, we can determine at most 
one tuple, so that branchNo is a candidate key. Similarly, postcode is also a candidate 
key for this relation.
Now consider a relation Viewing, which contains information relating to properties 
viewed by clients. The relation comprises a client number (clientNo), a property num-
ber (propertyNo), a date of viewing ( viewDate) and, optionally, a comment ( comment). 
Given a client number, clientNo, there may be several corresponding viewings for dif-
ferent properties. Similarly, given a property number, propertyNo, there may be several 
clients who viewed this property. Therefore, clientNo by itself or propertyNo by itself 
cannot be selected as a candidate key. However, the combination of clientNo and prop-
ertyNo identifies at most one tuple, so for the Viewing relation, clientNo and propertyNo 
together form the (composite) candidate key. If we need to take into account the pos-
sibility that a client may view a property more than once, then we could add 
viewDate 
to the composite key. However, we assume that this is not necessary.
Note that an instance of a relation cannot be used to prove that an attribute or 
combination of attributes is a candidate key. The fact that there are no duplicates 
for the values that appear at a particular moment in time does not guarantee that 
duplicates are not possible. However, the presence of duplicates in an instance can 
be used to show that some attribute combination is not a candidate key. Identifying 
a candidate key requires that we know the “real-world” meaning of the attribute(s) 
involved so that we can decide whether duplicates are possible. Only by using this 
semantic information can we be certain that an attribute combination is a candi-
date key. For example, from the data presented in Figure 4.1, we may think that 
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   158 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 13 ---
4.2 Terminology | 159
a  suitable candidate key for the Staff relation would be IName, the employee’s sur-
name. However, although there is only a single value of “White” in this instance 
of the Staff relation, a new member of staff with the surname “White” may join the 
company, invalidating the choice of IName as a candidate key.
Primary 
key 
The candidate key that is selected to identify tuples uniquely within 
the relation.
Because a relation has no duplicate tuples, it is always possible to identify each 
row uniquely. This means that a relation always has a primary key. In the worst 
case, the entire set of attributes could serve as the primary key, but usually some 
smaller subset is sufficient to distinguish the tuples. The candidate keys that are not 
selected to be the primary key are called alternate keys. For the Branch relation, 
if we choose 
branchNo as the primary key, postcode would then be an alternate key. 
For the Viewing relation, there is only one candidate key, comprising clientNo and 
propertyNo, so these attributes would automatically form the primary key.
Foreign 
key 
An attribute, or set of attributes, within one relation that matches the 
candidate key of some (possibly the same) relation.
When an attribute appears in more than one relation, its appearance usually rep-
resents a relationship between tuples of the two relations. For example, the inclusion 
of branchNo in both the Branch and Staff relations is quite deliberate and links each 
branch to the details of staff working at that branch. In the Branch relation, branchNo is 
the primary key. However, in the Staff relation, the branchNo attribute exists to match 
staff to the branch office they work in. In the Staff relation, branchNo is a foreign key. 
We say that the attribute branchNo in the Staff relation targets the primary key attribute 
branchNo in the home relation, Branch. These common attributes play an important 
role in performing data manipulation, as we see in the next chapter.
4.2.6 Representing Relational Database Schemas
A relational database consists of any number of normalized relations. The rela-
tional schema for part of the DreamHome case study is: 
 
Branch (branchNo,	street,	city,	postcode)	
Staff (staffNo,	fName,	IName,	position,	sex,	DOB,	salary,	branchNo)	
PropertyForRent (propertyNo,	street,	city,	postcode,	type,	rooms,	rent,	ownerNo,	
staffNo,	branchNo)
Client (clientNo,	fName,	IName,	telNo,	prefType,	maxRent,	eMail)
PrivateOwner (ownerNo,	fName,	IName,	address,	telNo,	eMail,	password)
Viewing (clientNo,	propertyNo,	viewDate,	comment)
Registration (clientNo,	branchNo,	staffNo,	dateJoined)
The common convention for representing a relation schema is to give the name of 
the relation followed by the attribute names in parentheses. Normally, the primary 
key is underlined.
The conceptual model, or conceptual schema, is the set of all such schemas for the 
database. Figure 4.3 shows an instance of this relational schema.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   159 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 14 ---
160 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
eMail
eMail
password
Figure 4-3 	
Instance	of	the	
DreamHome	
rental	database.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   160 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 15 ---
4.3 Integrity Constraints | 161
Null Represents a value for an attribute that is currently unknown or is not 
applicable for this tuple.
A null can be taken to mean the logical value “unknown.” It can mean that a value 
is not applicable to a particular tuple, or it could merely mean that no value has 
yet been supplied. Nulls are a way to deal with incomplete or exceptional data. 
However, a null is not the same as a zero numeric value or a text string filled with 
spaces; zeros and spaces are values, but a null represents the absence of a value. 
Therefore, nulls should be treated differently from other values. Some authors use 
the term “null value”; however, as a null is not a value but represents the absence 
of a value, the term “null value” is deprecated.
For example, in the 
Viewing relation shown in Figure 4.3, the comment attrib-
ute may be undefined until the potential renter has visited the property and 
returned his or her comment to the agency. Without nulls, it becomes necessary 
to introduce false data to represent this state or to add additional attributes that 
may not be meaningful to the user. In our example, we may try to represent 
a null comment with the value 21. Alternatively, we may add a new attribute 
 
hasCommentBeenSupplied to the Viewing relation, which contains a Y (Yes) if a com-
ment has been supplied, and N (No) otherwise. Both these approaches can be 
confusing to the user.
Nulls can cause implementation problems, arising from the fact that the rela-
tional model is based on first-order predicate calculus, which is a two-valued or 
Boolean logic—the only values allowed are true or false. Allowing nulls means that 
we have to work with a higher-valued logic, such as three- or four-valued logic 
(Codd, 1986, 1987, 1990).
4.3 Integrity Constraints
In the previous section, we discussed the structural part of the relational data 
model. As stated in Section 2.3, a data model has two other parts: a manipulative 
part, defining the types of operation that are allowed on the data, and a set of integ-
rity constraints, which ensure that the data is accurate. In this section, we discuss the 
relational integrity constraints, and in the next chapter, we discuss the relational 
manipulation operations.
We have already seen an example of an integrity constraint in Section 4.2.1: 
because every attribute has an associated domain, there are constraints (called 
domain constraints) that form restrictions on the set of values allowed for the 
attributes of relations. In addition, there are two important integrity rules, which 
are constraints or restrictions that apply to all instances of the database. The two 
principal rules for the relational model are known as entity integrity and referential 
integrity. Other types of integrity constraint are multiplicity, which we discuss in 
Section 12.6, and general constraints, which we introduce in Section 4.3.4. Before 
we define entity and referential integrity, it is necessary to understand the concept 
of nulls.
4.3.1 Nulls
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   161 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 16 ---
162 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
The incorporation of nulls in the relational model is a contentious issue. Codd 
later regarded nulls as an integral part of the model (Codd, 1990). Others consider 
this approach to be misguided, believing that the missing information problem is 
not fully understood, that no fully satisfactory solution has been found and, conse-
quently, that the incorporation of nulls in the relational model is premature (see, 
for example, Date, 1995).
We are now in a position to define the two relational integrity rules.
4.3.2 Entity Integrity
The first integrity rule applies to the primary keys of base relations. For the present, 
we define a base relation as a relation that corresponds to an entity in the concep-
tual schema (see Section 2.1). We provide a more precise definition in Section 4.4.
entity integrity In a base relation, no attribute of a primary key can be null.
By definition, a primary key is a minimal identifier that is used to identify tuples 
uniquely. This means that no subset of the primary key is sufficient to provide 
unique identification of tuples. If we allow a null for any part of a primary key, we 
are implying that not all the attributes are needed to distinguish between tuples, 
which contradicts the definition of the primary key. For example, as 
branchNo is the 
primary key of the Branch relation, we should not be able to insert a tuple into the 
Branch relation with a null for the branchNo attribute. As a second example, consider 
the composite primary key of the Viewing relation, comprising the client number 
(clientNo) and the property number ( propertyNo). We should not be able to insert a 
tuple into the Viewing relation with a null for the clientNo attribute, or a null for the 
propertyNo attribute, or nulls for both attributes.
If we were to examine this rule in detail, we would find some anomalies. First, 
why does the rule apply only to primary keys and not more generally to candidate 
keys, which also identify tuples uniquely? Second, why is the rule restricted to base 
relations? For example, using the data of the Viewing relation shown in Figure 4.3, 
consider the query “List all comments from viewings.” This query will produce a 
unary relation consisting of the attribute 
comment. By definition, this attribute must 
be a primary key, but it contains nulls (corresponding to the viewings on PG36 and 
PG4 by client CR56). Because this relation is not a base relation, the model allows 
the primary key to be null. There have been several attempts to redefine this rule 
(see, for example, Codd, 1988, and Date, 1990).
4.3.3 Referential Integrity
The second integrity rule applies to foreign keys.
Referential 
integrity 
If a foreign key exists in a relation, either the foreign key value must 
match a candidate key value of some tuple in its home relation or 
the foreign key value must be wholly null.
For example, branchNo in the Staff relation is a foreign key targeting the branchNo 
attribute in the home relation, Branch. It should not be possible to create a staff 
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   162 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 17 ---
4.4 Views | 163
record with branch number B025, for example, unless there is already a record 
for branch number B025 in the Branch relation. However, we should be able to cre-
ate a new staff record with a null branch number to allow for the situation where 
a new member of staff has joined the company but has not yet been assigned to a 
particular branch office.
4.3.4 General Constraints
General 
 constraints 
Additional rules specified by the users or database administrators 
of a database that define or constrain some aspect of the enterprise.
It is also possible for users to specify additional constraints that the data must sat-
isfy. For example, if an upper limit of 20 has been placed upon the number of staff 
that may work at a branch office, then the user must be able to specify this general 
constraint and expect the DBMS to enforce it. In this case, it should not be possible 
to add a new member of staff at a given branch to the 
Staff relation if the number of 
staff currently assigned to that branch is 20. Unfortunately, the level of support for 
general constraints varies from system to system. We discuss the implementation of 
relational integrity in 7 and 18.
4.4 Views
In the three-level ANSI-SPARC architecture presented in Chapter 2, we described 
an external view as the structure of the database as it appears to a particular user. 
In the relational model, the word “view” has a slightly different meaning. Rather 
than being the entire external model of a user’s view, a view is a virtual or derived 
relation: a relation that does not necessarily exist in its own right, but may be 
dynamically derived from one or more base relations. Thus, an external model can 
consist of both base (conceptual-level) relations and views derived from the base 
relations. In this section, we briefly discuss views in relational systems. In Section 
7.4 we examine views in more detail and show how they can be created and used 
within SQL.
4.4.1 Terminology
The relations we have been dealing with so far in this chapter are known as base 
relations.
Base 
 relation 
A named relation corresponding to an entity in the conceptual 
schema, whose tuples are physically stored in the database.
We can define a view in terms of base relations.
View 
The dynamic result of one or more relational operations operating on 
the base relations to produce another relation. A view is a virtual relation 
that does not necessarily exist in the database but can be produced upon 
request by a particular user, at the time of request.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   163 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 18 ---
164 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
A view is a relation that appears to the user to exist, can be manipulated as if 
it were a base relation, but does not necessarily exist in storage in the sense that 
the base relations do (although its definition is stored in the system catalog). 
The contents of a view are defined as a query on one or more base relations. 
Any operations on the view are automatically translated into operations on the 
relations from which it is derived. Views are dynamic, meaning that changes 
made to the base relations that affect the view are immediately reflected in the 
view. When users make permitted changes to the view, these changes are made 
to the underlying relations. In this section, we describe the purpose of views 
and briefly examine restrictions that apply to updates made through views. 
However, we defer treatment of how views are defined and processed until 
Section 7.4.
4.4.2 Purpose of Views
The view mechanism is desirable for several reasons:
•	 It provides a powerful and flexible security mechanism by hiding parts of the 
database from certain users. Users are not aware of the existence of any attributes 
or tuples that are missing from the view.
•	 It permits users to access data in a way that is customized to their needs, so 
that the same data can be seen by different users in different ways, at the same 
time.
•	 It can simplify complex operations on the base relations. For example, if a view 
is defined as a combination (join) of two relations (see Section 5.1), users may 
now perform more simple operations on the view, which will be translated by the 
DBMS into equivalent operations on the join.
A view should be designed to support the external model that the user finds 
 familiar. For example:
•	 A user might need Branch tuples that contain the names of managers as well 
as the other attributes already in Branch. This view is created by combining the 
Branch relation with a restricted form of the Staff relation where the staff position 
is “Manager.”
•	 Some members of staff should see Staff tuples without the salary attribute.
•	 Attributes may be renamed or the order of attributes changed. For example, the 
user accustomed to calling the 
branchNo attribute of branches by the full name 
Branch Number may see that column heading.
•	 Some members of staff should see property records only for those properties that 
they manage.
Although all these examples demonstrate that a view provides logical data independ-
ence (see Section 2.1.5), views allow a more significant type of logical data independ-
ence that supports the reorganization of the conceptual schema. For example, if a 
new attribute is added to a relation, existing users can be unaware of its existence 
if their views are defined to exclude it. If an existing relation is rearranged or split 
up, a view may be defined so that users can continue to see their original views. 
We will see an example of this in Section 7.4.7 when we discuss the advantages and 
disadvantages of views in more detail.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   164 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 19 ---
Chapter Summary | 165
4.4.3 Updating Views
All updates to a base relation should be immediately reflected in all views that 
reference that base relation. Similarly, if a view is updated, then the underlying 
base relation should reflect the change. However, there are restrictions on the 
types of modification that can be made through views. We summarize here the 
conditions under which most systems determine whether an update is allowed 
through a view:
•	 Updates are allowed through a view defined using a simple query involving a 
single base relation and containing either the primary key or a candidate key of 
the base relation.
•	 Updates are not allowed through views involving multiple base relations.
•	 Updates are not allowed through views involving aggregation or grouping 
 operations.
Classes of views have been defined that are theoretically not updatable, theoreti-
cally updatable, and partially updatable. A survey on updating relational views can 
be found in Furtado and Casanova (1985).
Chapter Summary
•	 The	Relational	Database	Management	System	(RDBMS)	has	become	the	dominant	data-processing	software	in	use	
today,	with	estimated	new	licence	sales	of	between	US$6	billion	and	US$10	billion	per	year	(US$25	billion	with	
tools	sales	included).	This	software	represents	the	second	generation	of	DBMSs	and	is	based	on	the	relational	
data	model	proposed	by	E.	F.	Codd.
•	 A	mathematical	relation	is	a	subset	of	the	Cartesian	product	of	two	or	more	sets.	In	database	terms,	a		relation	
is	any	subset	of	the	Cartesian	product	of	the	domains	of	the	attributes.	A	relation	is	normally	written	as	a	set	of	
n-tuples,	in	which	each	element	is	chosen	from	the	appropriate	domain.
•	 Relations	are	physically	represented	as	tables,	with	the	rows	corresponding	to	individual	tuples	and	the	columns	to	
attributes.
•	 The	structure	of	the	relation,	with	domain	specifications	and	other	constraints,	is	part	of	the	intension	of	the	
database;	the	relation	with	all	its	tuples	written	out	represents	an	instance	or extension	of	the	database.
•	 Properties	of	database	relations	are:	each	cell	contains	exactly	one	atomic	value,	attribute	names	are	distinct,	
attribute	values	come	from	the	same	domain,	attribute	order	is	immaterial,	tuple	order	is	immaterial,	and	there	
are	no	duplicate	tuples.
•	 The	degree	of	a	relation	is	the	number	of	attributes,	and	the	cardinality	is	the	number	of	tuples.	A	unary	
relation	has	one	attribute,	a	binary	relation	has	two,	a	ternary	relation	has	three,	and	an	n-ary	relation	has	n	
attributes.
•	 A	superkey	is	an	attribute,	or	set	of	attributes,	that	identifies	tuples	of	a	relation	uniquely,	and	a	candidate 
key	is	a	minimal	superkey.	A	primary key	is	the	candidate	key	chosen	for	use	in	identification	of	tuples.	A	rela-
tion	must	always	have	a	primary	key.	A	foreign key	is	an	attribute,	or	set	of	attributes,	within	one		relation	that	
is	the	candidate	key	of	another	relation.
•	 A	null	represents	a	value	for	an	attribute	that	is	unknown	at	the	present	time	or	is	not	applicable	for	this	tuple.
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   165 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 20 ---
•	 entity integrity	 is	a	constraint	that	states	that	in	a	base	relation	no	attribute	of	a	primary	key	can	be	null.	
Referential integrity	states	that	foreign	key	values	must	match	a	candidate	key	value	of	some	tuple	in	the	
home	relation	or	be	wholly	null.	Apart	from	relational	integrity,	integrity	constraints	include	required	data,	
domain,	and	multiplicity	constraints;	other	integrity	constraints	are	called	general constraints.
•	 A	view	in	the	relational	model	is	a	virtual	or	derived relation	that	is	dynamically	created	from	the	under-
lying	base	relation(s)	when	required.	Views	provide	security	and	allow	the	designer	to	customize	a	user’s	
model.	Not	all	views	are	updatable.
Review Questions
	 4.1	Discuss	each	of	the	following	concepts	in	the	context	of	the	relational	data	model:
(a)	 relation
(b)	attribute
(c)	domain
(d)	tuple
(e)	intension	and	extension
(f )	 degree	and	cardinality.
	 4.2	Describe	the	relationship	between	mathematical	relations	and	relations	in	the	relational	data	model.
	 4.3	Describe	the	term	“normalized	reaction.”	Why	are	constraints	so	important	in	a	relational	database?
	 4.4	Discuss	the	properties	of	a	relation.
	 4.5	Discuss	the	differences	between	the	candidate	keys	and	the	primary	key	of	a	relation.	Explain	what	is	meant	by	a	
foreign	key.	How	do	foreign	keys	of	relations	relate	to	candidate	keys?	Give	examples	to	illustrate	your	answer.
	 4.6	Define	the	two	principal	integrity	rules	for	the	relational	model.	Discuss	why	it	is	desirable	to	enforce	these	rules.
	 4.7	Define	“views.”	Why	are	they	important	in	a	database	approach?
exercises
The following tables form part of a database held in a relational DBMS:
	 	Hotel	(hotelNo,	hotelName,	city)
	 	Room	(roomNo,	hotelNo,	type,	price)
	 	Booking	(hotelNo,	guestNo,	dateFrom,	dateTo,	roomNo)
	 	Guest	(guestNo,	guestName,	guestAddress)
where	Hotel	contains hotel details and	hotelNo	is the primary key;
	 	Room	contains	room	details	for	each	hotel	and	(roomNo,	hoteINo)	forms	the	primary	key;
	 	Booking	contains	details	of	bookings	and	(hoteINo,	guestNo,	dateFrom) 	forms	the	primary	key;
	 	Guest	contains	guest	details	and	guestNo	is	the	primary	key.
	 4.8	Identify	the	foreign	keys	in	this	schema.	Explain	how	the	entity	and	referential	integrity	rules	apply	to	these	relations.
	 4.9	Produce	some	sample	tables	for	these	relations	that	observe	the	relational	integrity	rules.	Suggest	some	general	
constraints	that	would	be	appropriate	for	this	schema.
 4.10	Analyze	the	RDBMSs	that	you	are	currently	using.	Determine	the	support	the	system	provides	for	primary	keys,	
alternate	keys,	foreign	keys,	relational	integrity,	and	views.
 4.11	Implement	the	above	schema	in	one	of	the	RDBMSs	you	currently	use.	Generate	two	user-views	that	are	
accessible	and	updatable	as	well	as	two	other	user-views	that	cannot	be	updated.
166 | Chapter 4  The Relational Model
M04_CONN3067_06_SE_C04.indd   166 10/06/14   4:27 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 21 ---
Chapter
5 Relational Algebra and  
Relational Calculus
Chapter Objectives
In this chapter you will learn:
•	 The	meaning	of	the	term	“relational	completeness.”
•	 How	to	form	queries	in	the	relational	algebra.
•	 How	to	form	queries	in	the	tuple	relational	calculus.
•	 How	to	form	queries	in	the	domain	relational	calculus.
•	 The	categories	of	relational	Data	Manipulation	Languages	(DMLs).
In the previous chapter we introduced the main structural components of the 
relational model. As we discussed in Section 2.3, another important part of a data 
model is a manipulation mechanism, or query language, to allow the underlying 
data to be retrieved and updated. In this chapter we examine the query languages 
associated with the relational model. In particular, we concentrate on the rela-
tional algebra and the relational calculus as defined by Codd (1971) as the basis 
for relational languages. Informally, we may describe the relational algebra as a 
(high-level) procedural language: it can be used to tell the DBMS how to build 
a new relation from one or more relations in the database. Again, informally, we 
may describe the relational calculus as a nonprocedural language: it can be used to 
formulate the definition of a relation in terms of one or more database relations. 
However, the relational algebra and relational calculus are formally equivalent to 
one another: for every expression in the algebra, there is an equivalent expression 
in the calculus (and vice versa).
Both the algebra and the calculus are formal, non-user-friendly languages. They 
have been used as the basis for other, higher-level Data Manipulation Languages 
(DMLs) for relational databases. They are of interest because they illustrate the 
basic operations required of any DML and because they serve as the standard of 
comparison for other relational languages.
The relational calculus is used to measure the selective power of relational 
 languages. A language that can be used to produce any relation that can be 
derived using the relational calculus is said to be relationally complete. Most 
 relational query languages are relationally complete but have more expressive 
167
M05_CONN3067_06_SE_C05.indd   167 06/06/14   5:01 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

