--- PAGE 1 ---
52 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
to be addressed. Moreover, as the applications of database systems become even 
more complex we will have to rethink many of the algorithms currently being used, 
such as the algorithms for file storage, file access, and query optimization. These 
original algorithms have made significant contributions in software engineering 
and, without doubt, the development of new algorithms will have similar effects. In 
this first chapter, we introduce the database system.
“As a result of its importance, many computing and business courses cover the 
study of database systems. In this book, we explore a range of issues associated with 
the implementation and applications of database systems. We also focus on how to 
design a database and present a methodology that should help you design both 
simply and complex databases.
1.1 Introduction
The database is now such an integral part of our day-to-day life that often we are 
not aware that we are using one. To start our discussion of databases, in this sec-
tion we examine some applications of database systems. For the purposes of this 
discussion, we consider a database to be a collection of related data and a database 
management system (DBMS) to be the software that manages and controls access 
to the database. A database application is simply a program that interacts with 
the database at some point in its execution. We also use the more inclusive term 
database system as a collection of application programs that interact with the 
database along with the DBMS and the database itself. We provide more accurate 
definitions in Section 1.3.
Structure of this Chapter In Section 1.1, we examine some uses of 
database systems that we find in everyday life but are not necessarily aware of. 
In Sections 1.2 and 1.3, we compare the early file-based approach to computer-
izing the manual file system with the modern, and more usable, database ap-
proach. In Section 1.4, we discuss the four types of role that people perform in 
the database environment, namely: data and database administrators, database 
designers, application developers, and end-users. In Section 1.5, we provide a 
brief history of database systems, and follow that in Section 1.6 with a discussion 
of the advantages and disadvantages of database systems.
Throughout this book, we illustrate concepts using a case study based on 
a fictitious property management company called DreamHome. We provide 
a detailed description of this case study in Section 11.4 and Appendix A. In 
Appendix B, we present further case studies that are intended to provide ad-
ditional realistic projects for the reader. There will be exercises based on these 
case studies at the end of many chapters.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   52 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 2 ---
1.1 Introduction | 53
Purchases from the supermarket
When you purchase goods from your local supermarket, it is likely that a database 
is accessed. The checkout assistant uses a bar code reader to scan each of your 
purchases. This reader is linked to a database application that uses the bar code 
to find out the price of the item from a product database. The application then 
reduces the number of such items in stock and displays the price on the cash reg-
ister. If the reorder level falls below a specified threshold, the database system may 
automatically place an order to obtain more of that item. If a customer telephones 
the supermarket, an assistant can check whether an item is in stock by running an 
application program that determines availability from the database.
Purchases using your credit card
When you purchase goods using your credit card, the assistant normally checks 
whether you have sufficient credit left to make the purchase. This check may be 
carried out by telephone or automatically by a card reader linked to a computer sys-
tem. In either case, there is a database somewhere that contains information about 
the purchases that you have made using your credit card. To check your credit, 
there is a database application that uses your credit card number to check that the 
price of the goods you wish to buy, together with the sum of the purchases that 
you have already made this month, is within your credit limit. When the purchase 
is confirmed, the details of the purchase are added to this database. The database 
application also accesses the database to confirm that the credit card is not on the 
list of stolen or lost cards before authorizing the purchase. There are other data-
base applications to send out monthly statements to each cardholder and to credit 
accounts when payment is received.
Booking a vacation with a travel agent
When you make inquiries about a vacation, your travel agent may access several 
databases containing vacation and flight details. When you book your vacation, the 
database system has to make all the necessary booking arrangements. In this case, 
the system has to ensure that two different agents do not book the same vacation or 
overbook the seats on the flight. For example, if there is only one seat left on the 
flight from New York to London and two agents try to reserve the last seat at the 
same time, the system has to recognize this situation, allow one booking to proceed, 
and inform the other agent that there are now no seats available. The travel agent 
may have another, usually separate, database for invoicing.
Using the local library
Your local library probably has a database containing details of the books in the 
library, details of the readers, reservations, and so on. There will be a computer-
ized index that allows readers to find a book based on its title, authors, or subject 
area. The database system handles reservations to allow a reader to reserve a book 
and to be informed by mail or email when the book is available. The system also 
sends reminders to borrowers who have failed to return books by the due date. 
Typically, the system will have a bar code reader, similar to that used by the 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   53 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 3 ---
54 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
supermarket described earlier, that is used to keep track of books coming in and 
going out of the library.
Taking out insurance
Whenever you wish to take out insurance—for example personal insurance, prop-
erty insurance, or auto insurance, your agent may access several databases con-
taining figures for various insurance organizations. The personal details that you 
supply, such as name, address, age, and whether you drink or smoke, are used by 
the database system to determine the cost of the insurance. An insurance agent can 
search several databases to find the organization that gives you the best deal.
Renting a DVD
When you wish to rent a DVD from a DVD rental company, you will probably find 
that the company maintains a database consisting of the DVD titles that it stocks, 
details on the copies it has for each title, whether the copy is available for rent or 
is currently on loan, details of its members (the renters), and which DVDs they are 
currently renting and date they are returned. The database may even store more 
detailed information on each DVD, such as its director and its actors. The company 
can use this information to monitor stock usage and predict future buying trends 
based on historic rental data.
Using the Internet
Many of the sites on the Internet are driven by database applications. For example, 
you may visit an online bookstore that allows you to browse and buy books, such 
as Amazon.com. The bookstore allows you to browse books in different categories, 
such as computing or management, or by author name. In either case, there is 
a database on the organization’s Web server that consists of book details, avail-
ability, shipping information, stock levels, and order history. Book details include 
book titles, ISBNs, authors, prices, sales histories, publishers, reviews, and detailed 
descriptions. The database allows books to be cross-referenced: for example, a 
book may be listed under several categories, such as computing, programming 
languages, bestsellers, and recommended titles. The cross-referencing also allows 
Amazon to give you information on other books that are typically ordered along 
with the title you are interested in.
As with an earlier example, you can provide your credit card details to purchase 
one or more books online. Amazon.com personalizes its service for customers who 
return to its site by keeping a record of all previous transactions, including items 
purchased, shipping, and credit card details. When you return to the site, you 
might be greeted by name and presented with a list of recommended titles based 
on previous purchases.
Studying at College
If you are at college, there will be a database system containing information about 
yourself, your major and minor fields, the courses you are enrolled in, details 
about your financial aid, the classes you have taken in previous years or are taking 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   54 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 4 ---
1.2 Traditional File-Based Systems | 55
this year, and details of all your examination results. There may also be a database 
containing details relating to the next year’s admissions and a database containing 
details of the staff working at the university, giving personal details and salary-
related details for the payroll office.
These are only a few of the applications for database systems, and you will no 
doubt know of plenty of others. Though we now take such applications for granted, 
the database system is a highly complex technology that has been developed over 
the past 40 years. In the next section, we discuss the precursor to the database sys-
tem: the file-based system.
1.2 Traditional File-Based Systems
It is almost a tradition that comprehensive database books introduce the database 
system with a review of its predecessor, the file-based system. We will not depart 
from this tradition. Although the file-based approach is largely obsolete, there are 
good reasons for studying it:
• Understanding the problems inherent in file-based systems may prevent us from 
repeating these problems in database systems. In other words, we should learn 
from our earlier mistakes. Actually, using the word “mistakes” is derogatory and 
does not give any cognizance to the work that served a useful purpose for many 
years. However, we have learned from this work that there are better ways to 
handle data.
• If you wish to convert a file-based system to a database system, understanding 
how the file system works will be extremely useful, if not essential.
1.2.1 File-Based Approach
File-based 
system
A collection of application programs that perform services for the 
end-users, such as the production of reports. Each program defines 
and manages its own data.
File-based systems were an early attempt to computerize the manual filing system 
that we are all familiar with. For example, an organization might have physical files 
set up to hold all external and internal correspondence relating to a project, prod-
uct, task, client, or employee. Typically, there are many such files, and for safety 
they are labeled and stored in one or more cabinets. For security, the cabinets may 
have locks or may be located in secure areas of the building. In our own home, we 
probably have some sort of filing system that contains receipts, warranties, 
invoices, bank statements, and so on. When we need to look something up, we go 
to the filing system and search through the system, starting at the first entry, until 
we find what we want. Alternatively, we might have an indexing system that helps 
locate what we want more quickly. For example, we might have divisions in the 
filing system or separate folders for different types of items that are in some way 
logically related.
The manual filing system works well as long as the number of items to be stored 
is small. It even works adequately when there are large numbers of items and we 
only have to store and retrieve them. However, the manual filing system breaks 
down when we have to cross-reference or process the information in the files. For 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   55 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 5 ---
56 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
example, a typical real estate agent’s office might have a separate file for each 
property for sale or rent, each potential buyer and renter, and each member of 
staff. Consider the effort that would be required to answer the following questions:
• What three-bedroom properties do you have for sale with an acre of land and a 
garage?
• What apartments do you have for rent within three miles of downtown?
• What is the average rent for a two-bedroom apartment?
• What is the annual total for staff salaries?
• How does last month’s net income compare with the projected figure for this 
month?
• What is the expected monthly net income for the next financial year?
Increasingly nowadays, clients, senior managers, and staff want more and more 
information. In some business sectors, there is a legal requirement to produce 
detailed monthly, quarterly, and annual reports. Clearly, the manual system is 
inadequate for this type of work. The file-based system was developed in response 
to the needs of industry for more efficient data access. However, rather than 
establish a centralized store for the organization’s operational data, a decentral-
ized approach was taken, where each department, with the assistance of Data 
Processing (DP) staff, stored and controlled its own data. To understand what this 
means, consider the DreamHome example.
The Sales Department is responsible for the selling and renting of properties. 
For example, whenever a client who wishes to offer his or her property as a rental 
approaches the Sales Department, a form similar to the one shown in Figure 1.1(a) 
is completed. The completed form contains details on the property, such as address, 
number of rooms, and the owner’s contact information. The Sales Department also 
handles inquiries from clients, and a form similar to the one shown in Figure l.l (b) 
is completed for each one. With the assistance of the DP Department, the Sales 
Department creates an information system to handle the renting of property. The 
system consists of three files containing property, owner, and client details, as illus-
trated in Figure 1.2. For simplicity, we omit details relating to members of staff, 
branch offices, and business owners.
The Contracts Department is responsible for handling the lease agreements asso-
ciated with properties for rent. Whenever a client agrees to rent a property, a form 
with the client and property details is filled in by one of the sales staff, as shown 
in Figure 1.3. This form is passed to the Contracts Department, which allocates a 
lease number and completes the payment and rental period details. Again, with the 
assistance of the DP Department, the Contracts Department creates an information 
system to handle lease agreements. The system consists of three files that store 
lease, property, and client details, and that contain similar data to that held by the 
Sales Department, as illustrated in Figure 1.4
The process is illustrated in Figure 1.5. It shows each department accessing 
their own files through application programs written especially for them. Each 
set of departmental application programs handles data entry, file maintenance, 
and the generation of a fixed set of specific reports. More important, the physical 
structure and storage of the data files and records are defined in the application 
code.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   56 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure 1.1  Sales Department forms; (a) Property for Rent Details form; (b) Client Details form.
57
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   57 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 7 ---
58 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
Figure 1.2 The PropertyForRent, PrivateOwner, and Client files used by Sales.
Figure 1.3  
Lease Details 
form used 
by Contracts 
Department.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   58 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 8 ---
1.2 Traditional File-Based Systems | 59
We can find similar examples in other departments. For example, the Payroll 
Department stores details relating to each member of staff’s salary:
StaffSalary(staffNo, fName, IName, sex, salary, branchNo)
The Human Resources (HR) Department also stores staff details:
Staff(staffNo, fName, IName, position, sex, dateOfBirth, salary, branchNo)
Figure 1.4  
The Lease, 
PropertyForRent, 
and Client 
files used by 
the Contracts 
Department.
Figure 1.5  
File-based 
processing.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   59 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 9 ---
60 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
It can be seen quite clearly that there is a significant amount of duplication of data 
in these departments, and this is generally true of file-based systems. Before we 
discuss the limitations of this approach, it may be useful to understand the termi-
nology used in file-based systems. A file is simply a collection of records, which 
contains logically related data. For example, the 
PropertyForRent file in Figure 1.2 
contains six records, one for each property. Each record contains a logically con-
nected set of one or more fields, where each field represents some characteristic 
of the real-world object that is being modeled. In Figure 1.2, the fields of the 
PropertyForRent file represent characteristics of properties, such as address, property 
type, and number of rooms.
1.2.2 Limitations of the File-Based Approach
This brief description of traditional file-based systems should be sufficient to discuss 
the limitations of this approach. We list five problems in Table 1.1.
Separation and isolation of data
When data is isolated in separate files, it is more difficult to access data that should 
be available. For example, if we want to produce a list of all houses that match the 
requirements of clients, we first need to create a temporary file of those clients who 
have “house” as the preferred type. We then search the 
PropertyForRent file for those 
properties where the property type is “house” and the rent is less than the client’s 
maximum rent. With file systems, such processing is difficult. The application 
developer must synchronize the processing of two files to ensure that the correct 
data is extracted. This difficulty is compounded if we require data from more than 
two files.
Duplication of data
Owing to the decentralized approach taken by each department, the file-based 
approach encouraged, if not necessitated, the uncontrolled duplication of data. For 
example, in Figure 1.5 we can clearly see that there is duplication of both property 
and client details in the Sales and Contracts Departments. Uncontrolled duplica-
tion of data is undesirable for several reasons, including:
• Duplication is wasteful. It costs time and money to enter the data more than once.
• It takes up additional storage space, again with associated costs. Often, the dupli-
cation of data can be avoided by sharing data files.
TaBle 1.1  Limitations of file-based systems.
Separation and isolation of data
Duplication of data
Data dependence
Incompatible file formats
Fixed queries/proliferation of application programs
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   60 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 10 ---
1.2 Traditional File-Based Systems | 61
• Perhaps more importantly, duplication can lead to loss of data integrity; in 
other words, the data is no longer consistent. For example, consider the dupli-
cation of data between the Payroll and HR Departments described previously. 
If a member of staff moves and the change of address is communicated only to 
HR and not to Payroll, the person’s paycheck will be sent to the wrong address. 
A more serious problem occurs if an employee is promoted with an associated 
increase in salary. Again, let’s assume that the change is announced to HR, but 
the change does not filter through to Payroll. Now, the employee is receiv-
ing the wrong salary. When this error is detected, it will take time and effort to 
resolve. Both these examples illustrate inconsistencies that may result from the 
duplication of data. As there is no automatic way for HR to update the data in 
the Payroll files, it is not difficult to foresee such inconsistencies arising. Even 
if Payroll is notified of the changes, it is possible that the data will be entered 
incorrectly.
Data dependence
As we have already mentioned, the physical structure and storage of the data files 
and records are defined in the application code. This means that changes to an 
existing structure are difficult to make. For example, increasing the size of the 
PropertyForRent address field from 40 to 41 characters sounds like a simple change, 
but it requires the creation of a one-off program (that is, a program that is run only 
once and can then be discarded) that converts the 
PropertyForRent file to the new 
format. This program has to:
• Open the original PropertyForRent file for reading
• Open a temporary file with the new structure
• Read a record from the original file, convert the data to conform to the new 
structure, and write it to the temporary file, then repeat this step for all records 
in the original file
• Delete the original PropertyForRent file
• Rename the temporary file as PropertyForRent
In addition, all programs that access the PropertyForRent file must be modified to 
conform to the new file structure. There might be many such programs that access 
the PropertyForRent file. Thus, the programmer needs to identify all the affected 
programs, modify them, and then retest them. Note that a program does not even 
have to use the address field to be affected: it only has to use the 
PropertyForRent 
file. Clearly, this process could be very time-consuming and subject to error. This 
characteristic of file-based systems is known as program–data dependence.
Incompatible file formats
Because the structure of files is embedded in the application programs, the struc-
tures are dependent on the application programming language. For example, 
the structure of a file generated by a COBOL program may be different from the 
structure of a file generated by a C program. The direct incompatibility of such files 
makes them difficult to process jointly.
For example, suppose that the Contracts Department wants to find the names and 
addresses of all owners whose property is currently rented out. Unfortunately, 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   61 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 11 ---
62 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
Contracts does not hold the details of property owners; only the Sales 
Department holds these. However, Contracts has the property number ( prop-
ertyNo), which can be used to find the corresponding property number in the 
Sales Department’s PropertyForRent file. This file holds the owner number  
(ownerNo), which can be used to find the owner details in the PrivateOwner file. The 
Contracts Department programs in COBOL and the Sales Department programs 
in C. Therefore, matching 
propertyNo fields in the two PropertyForRent files requires 
that an application developer write software to convert the files to some common 
format to facilitate processing. Again, this process can be time-consuming and 
expensive.
Fixed queries/proliferation of application programs
From the end-user’s point of view, file-based systems were a great improvement 
over manual systems. Consequently, the requirement for new or modified queries 
grew. However, file-based systems are very dependent upon the application devel-
oper, who has to write any queries or reports that are required. As a result, two 
things happened. In some organizations, the type of query or report that could be 
produced was fixed. There was no facility for asking unplanned (that is, spur-of-
the-moment or ad hoc) queries either about the data itself or about which types of 
data were available.
In other organizations, there was a proliferation of files and application pro-
grams. Eventually, this reached a point where the DP Department, with its existing 
resources, could not handle all the work. This put tremendous pressure on the 
DP staff, resulting in programs that were inadequate or inefficient in meeting the 
demands of the users, limited documentation, and difficult maintenance. Often, 
certain types of functionality were omitted:
• There was no provision for security or integrity.
• Recovery, in the event of a hardware or software failure, was limited or  
nonexistent.
• Access to the files was restricted to one user at a time—there was no provision for 
shared access by staff in the same department.
In either case, the outcome was unacceptable. Another solution was required.
1.3 Database approach
All of the previously mentioned limitations of the file-based approach can be attrib-
uted to two factors:
(1) The definition of the data is embedded in the application programs, rather 
than being stored separately and independently.
(2) There is no control over the access and manipulation of data beyond that 
imposed by the application programs.
To become more effective, a new approach was required. What emerged were the 
database and the Database Management System (DBMS). In this section, we provide 
a more formal definition of these terms, and examine the components that we might 
expect in a DBMS environment.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   62 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 12 ---
1.3 Database Approach | 63
1.3.1 The Database
Database A shared collection of logically related data and its description, 
designed to meet the information needs of an organization.
We now examine the definition of a database so that you can understand the 
concept fully. The database is a single, possibly large repository of data that can 
be used simultaneously by many departments and users. Instead of disconnected 
files with redundant data, all data items are integrated with a minimum amount of 
duplication. The database is no longer owned by one department but is a shared 
corporate resource. The database holds not only the organization’s operational 
data, but also a description of this data. For this reason, a database is also defined 
as a self-describing collection of integrated records. The description of the data is known 
as the system catalog (or data dictionary or metadata—the “data about data”). It is 
the self-describing nature of a database that provides program–data independence.
The approach taken with database systems, where the definition of data is sepa-
rated from the application programs, is similar to the approach taken in modern 
software development, where an internal definition of an object and a separate 
external definition are provided. The users of an object see only the external 
definition and are unaware of how the object is defined and how it functions. One 
advantage of this approach, known as data abstraction, is that we can change the 
internal definition of an object without affecting the users of the object, provided 
that the external definition remains the same. In the same way, the database 
approach separates the structure of the data from the application programs and 
stores it in the database. If new data structures are added or existing structures are 
modified, then the application programs are unaffected, provided that they do not 
directly depend upon what has been modified. For example, if we add a new field 
to a record or create a new file, existing applications are unaffected. However, if we 
remove a field from a file that an application program uses, then that application 
program is affected by this change and must be modified accordingly.
Another expression in the definition of a database that we should explain is 
“logically related.” When we analyze the information needs of an organization, 
we attempt to identify entities, attributes, and relationships. An entity is a distinct 
object (a person, place, thing, concept, or event) in the organization that is to be 
represented in the database. An attribute is a property that describes some aspect 
of the object that we wish to record, and a relationship is an association between 
entities. For example, Figure 1.6 shows an Entity–Relationship (ER) diagram for 
part of the DreamHome case study. It consists of:
•	 six entities (the rectangles): Branch, Staff, PropertyForRent, Client, PrivateOwner,  and 
Lease;
•	 seven relationships (the names adjacent to the lines): Has, Offers, Oversees, Views, 
Owns, LeasedBy, and Holds;
•	 six attributes, one for each entity: branchNo, staffNo, propertyNo, clientNo, ownerNo, and 
leaseNo.
The database represents the entities, the attributes, and the logical relationships 
between the entities. In other words, the database holds data that is logically 
related. We discuss the ER model in detail in Chapters 12 and 13.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   63 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 13 ---
64 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
branchNo
Branch
1..1
1..1
Offers
staffNo
Staff
0..1
Oversees
Has
1..*
propertyNo
PropertyForRent
0..*
1..1
LeasedBy
clientNo
Client
1..1
Holds
Views
0..*
ownerNo
PrivateOwner
leaseNo
Lease 0..*
Owns
0..1
0..*
1..*
1..*
0..100
Figure 1.6 example entity–Relationship diagram.
1.3.2 The Database Management System (DBMS)
DBMS A software system that enables users to define, create, maintain, and 
control access to the database.
The DBMS is the software that interacts with the users’ application programs and 
the database. Typically, a DBMS provides the following facilities:
• It allows users to define the database, usually through a Data Definition 
Language (DDL). The DDL allows users to specify the data types and structures 
and the constraints on the data to be stored in the database.
• It allows users to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data from the database, usu-
ally through a Data Manipulation Language (DML). Having a central repository 
for all data and data descriptions allows the DML to provide a general inquiry 
facility to this data, called a query language. The provision of a query language 
alleviates the problems with file-based systems where the user has to work with a 
fixed set of queries or there is a proliferation of programs, causing major software 
management problems. The most common query language is the Structured 
Query Language (SQL, pronounced “S-Q-L”, or sometimes “See-Quel”), which 
is now both the formal and de facto standard language for relational DBMSs. To 
emphasize the importance of SQL, we devote Chapters 6–9 and Appendix I to a 
comprehensive study of this language.
• It provides controlled access to the database. For example, it may provide:
– a security system, which prevents unauthorized users accessing the database;
– an integrity system, which maintains the consistency of stored data;
– a concurrency control system, which allows shared access of the database;
– a recovery control system, which restores the database to a previous consistent 
state following a hardware or software failure;
– a user-accessible catalog, which contains descriptions of the data in the database.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   64 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 14 ---
1.3 Database Approach | 65
1.3.3 (Database) Application Programs
application 
Programs
A computer program that interacts with the database by issuing 
an appropriate request (typically an SQL statement) to the DBMS.
Users interact with the database through a number of application programs that 
are used to create and maintain the database and to generate information. These 
programs can be conventional batch applications or, more typically nowadays, 
online applications. The application programs may be written in a programming 
language or in higher-level fourth-generation language.
The database approach is illustrated in Figure 1.7, based on the file approach 
of Figure 1.5. It shows the Sales and Contracts Departments using their applica-
tion programs to access the database through the DBMS. Each set of departmental 
application programs handles data entry, data maintenance, and the generation of 
reports. However, as opposed to the file-based approach, the physical structure and 
storage of the data are now managed by the DBMS.
Views
With this functionality, the DBMS is an extremely powerful and useful tool. 
However, as the end-users are not too interested in how complex or easy a task is 
for the system, it could be argued that the DBMS has made things more complex, 
because they now see more data than they actually need or want. For example, the 
details that the Contracts Department wants to see for a rental property, as shown 
in Figure 1.5, have changed in the database approach, shown in Figure 1.7. Now 
the database also holds the property type, the number of rooms, and the owner 
details. In recognition of this problem, a DBMS provides another facility known 
as a view mechanism, which allows each user to have his or her own view of the 
Figure 1.7  Database processing.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   65 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 15 ---
66 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
database (a view is, in essence, some subset of the database). For example, we could 
set up a view that allows the Contracts Department to see only the data that they 
want to see for rental properties.
As well as reducing complexity by letting users see the data in the way they want 
to see it, views have several other benefits:
• Views provide a level of security. Views can be set up to exclude data that some users 
should not see. For example, we could create a view that allows a branch manager 
and the Payroll Department to see all staff data, including salary details, and we 
could create a second view that other staff would use that excludes salary details.
• Views provide a mechanism to customize the appearance of the database. For example, 
the Contracts Department may wish to call the monthly rent field (
rent) by the 
more obvious name, Monthly Rent.
• A view can present a consistent, unchanging picture of the structure of the database, even 
if the underlying database is changed (for example, fields added or removed, 
relationships changed, files split, restructured, or renamed). If fields are added 
or removed from a file, and these fields are not required by the view, the view is 
not affected by this change. Thus, a view helps provide the program–data inde-
pendence we mentioned previously.
The previous discussion is general and the actual level of functionality offered by 
a DBMS differs from product to product. For example, a DBMS for a personal 
computer may not support concurrent shared access, and may provide only lim-
ited security, integrity, and recovery control. However, modern, large multi-user 
DBMS products offer all the functions mentioned and much more. Modern sys-
tems are extremely complex pieces of software consisting of millions of lines of 
code, with documentation comprising many volumes. This complexity is a result 
of having to provide software that handles requirements of a more general nature. 
Furthermore, the use of DBMSs nowadays requires a system that provides almost 
total reliability and 24/7 availability (24 hours a day, 7 days a week), even in the 
presence of hardware or software failure. The DBMS is continually evolving and 
expanding to cope with new user requirements. For example, some applications 
now require the storage of graphic images, video, sound, and so on. To reach this 
market, the DBMS must change. It is likely that new functionality will always be 
required, so the functionality of the DBMS will never become static. We discuss the 
basic functions provided by a DBMS in later chapters.
1.3.4 Components of the DBMS Environment
We can identify five major components in the DBMS environment: hardware, soft-
ware, data, procedures, and people, as illustrated in Figure 1.8.Figure 1.8  The DBMS environment.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   66 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 16 ---
1.3 Database Approach | 67
Hardware
The DBMS and the applications require hardware to run. The hardware can range 
from a single personal computer to a single mainframe or a network of comput-
ers. The particular hardware depends on the organization’s requirements and the 
DBMS used. Some DBMSs run only on particular hardware or operating systems, 
while others run on a wide variety of hardware and operating systems. A DBMS 
requires a minimum amount of main memory and disk space to run, but this mini-
mum configuration may not necessarily give acceptable performance. A simplified 
hardware configuration for DreamHome is illustrated in Figure 1.9. It consists of 
a network of small servers, with a central server located in London running the 
backend of the DBMS, that is, the part of the DBMS that manages and controls 
access to the database. It also shows several computers at various locations running 
the frontend of the DBMS, that is, the part of the DBMS that interfaces with the 
user. This is called a client–server architecture: the backend is the server and the 
frontends are the clients. We discuss this type of architecture in Section 3.1.
Figure 1.9  DreamHome hardware configuration.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   67 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 17 ---
68 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
Software
The software component comprises the DBMS software itself and the application 
programs, together with the operating system, including network software if the 
DBMS is being used over a network. Typically, application programs are written 
in a third-generation programming language (3GL), such as C, C++, C#, Java, 
Visual Basic, COBOL, Fortran, Ada, or Pascal, or a fourth-generation language 
(4GL), such as SQL, embedded in a third-generation language. The target DBMS 
may have its own fourth-generation tools that allow rapid development of appli-
cations through the provision of nonprocedural query languages, reports genera-
tors, forms generators, graphics generators, and application generators. The use 
of fourth-generation tools can improve productivity significantly and produce 
programs that are easier to maintain. We discuss fourth-generation tools in  
Section 2.2.3.
Data
Perhaps the most important component of the DBMS environment—certainly from 
the end-users’ point of view—is the data. In Figure 1.8, we observe that the data 
acts as a bridge between the machine components and the human components. 
The database contains both the operational data and the metadata, the “data about 
data.” The structure of the database is called the schema. In Figure 1.7, the schema 
consists of four files, or tables, namely: 
PropertyForRent, PrivateOwner , Client, and 
Lease. The PropertyForRent table has eight fields, or attributes, namely: propertyNo,  
street, city, zipCode, type (the property type), rooms (the number of rooms), rent (the 
monthly rent), and ownerNo. The ownerNo attribute models the relationship between 
PropertyForRent and PrivateOwner:  that is, an owner Owns a property for rent, as 
depicted in the ER diagram of Figure 1.6. For example, in Figure 1.2 we observe 
that owner CO46, Joe Keogh, owns property PA14.
The data also incorporates the system catalog, which we discuss in detail in 
Section 2.4.
Procedures
Procedures refer to the instructions and rules that govern the design and use of the 
database. The users of the system and the staff who manage the database require 
documented procedures on how to use or run the system. These may consist of 
instructions on how to:
• Log on to the DBMS.
• Use a particular DBMS facility or application program.
• Start and stop the DBMS.
• Make backup copies of the database.
• Handle hardware or software failures. This may include procedures on how to 
identify the failed component, how to fix the failed component (for example, 
telephone the appropriate hardware engineer), and, following the repair of the 
fault, how to recover the database.
• Change the structure of a table, reorganize the database across multiple disks, 
improve performance, or archive data to secondary storage.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   68 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 18 ---
1.4 Roles in the Database Environment | 69
People
The final component is the people involved with the system. We discuss this com-
ponent in Section 1.4.
1.3.5 Database Design: The Paradigm Shift
Until now, we have taken it for granted that there is a structure to the data in the 
database. For example, we have identified four tables in Figure 1.7: 
PropertyForRent, 
PrivateOwner, Client,  and Lease. But how did we get this structure? The answer is 
quite simple: the structure of the database is determined during database design. 
However, carrying out database design can be extremely complex. To produce a 
system that will satisfy the organization’s information needs requires a different 
approach from that of file-based systems, where the work was driven by the appli-
cation needs of individual departments. For the database approach to succeed, the 
organization now has to think of the data first and the application second. This 
change in approach is sometimes referred to as a paradigm shift. For the system 
to be acceptable to the end-users, the database design activity is crucial. A poorly 
designed database will generate errors that may lead to bad decisions, which may 
have serious repercussions for the organization. On the other hand, a well-designed 
database produces a system that provides the correct information for the decision-
making process to succeed in an efficient way.
The objective of this book is to help effect this paradigm shift. We devote several 
chapters to the presentation of a complete methodology for database design (see 
Chapters 16–19). It is presented as a series of simple-to-follow steps, with guidelines 
provided throughout. For example, in the ER diagram of Figure 1.6, we have iden-
tified six entities, seven relationships, and six attributes. We provide guidelines to 
help identify the entities, attributes, and relationships that have to be represented 
in the database.
Unfortunately, database design methodologies are not very popular. Many organ-
izations and individual designers rely very little on methodologies for conducting 
the design of databases, and this is commonly considered a major cause of failure in 
the development of database systems. Owing to the lack of structured approaches to 
database design, the time or resources required for a database project are typically 
underestimated, the databases developed are inadequate or inefficient in meeting 
the demands of applications, documentation is limited, and maintenance is difficult.
1.4 Roles in the Database environment
In this section, we examine what we listed in the previous section as the fifth compo-
nent of the DBMS environment: the people. We can identify four distinct types of 
people who participate in the DBMS environment: data and database administra-
tors, database designers, application developers, and end-users.
1.4.1 Data and Database Administrators
The database and the DBMS are corporate resources that must be managed 
like any other resource. Data and database administration are the roles gener-
ally associated with the management and control of a DBMS and its data. The 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   69 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 19 ---
70 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
Data Administrator (DA) is responsible for the management of the data resource, 
including database planning; development and maintenance of standards, policies 
and procedures; and conceptual/logical database design. The DA consults with and 
advises senior managers, ensuring that the direction of database development will 
ultimately support corporate objectives.
The Database Administrator (DBA) is responsible for the physical realization of 
the database, including physical database design and implementation, security and 
integrity control, maintenance of the operational system, and ensuring satisfactory 
performance of the applications for users. The role of the DBA is more technically 
oriented than the role of the DA, requiring detailed knowledge of the target DBMS 
and the system environment. In some organizations there is no distinction between 
these two roles; in others, the importance of the corporate resources is reflected in 
the allocation of teams of staff dedicated to each of these roles. We discuss data and 
database administration in more detail in Section 20.15.
1.4.2 Database Designers
In large database design projects, we can distinguish between two types of 
designer: logical database designers and physical database designers. The logical 
database designer is concerned with identifying the data (that is, the entities and 
attributes), the relationships between the data, and the constraints on the data that 
is to be stored in the database. The logical database designer must have a thor-
ough and complete understanding of the organization’s data and any constraints 
on this data (the constraints are sometimes called business rules). These con-
straints describe the main characteristics of the data as viewed by the organization. 
Examples of constraints for DreamHome are:
• a member of staff cannot manage more than 100 properties for rent or sale at the 
same time;
• a member of staff cannot handle the sale or rent of his or her own property;
•	 a solicitor cannot act for both the buyer and seller of a property.
To be effective, the logical database designer must involve all prospective database 
users in the development of the data model, and this involvement should begin as 
early in the process as possible. In this book, we split the work of the logical data-
base designer into two stages:
• conceptual database design, which is independent of implementation details, 
such as the target DBMS, application programs, programming languages, or any 
other physical considerations;
•	 logical database design, which targets a specific data model, such as relational, 
network, hierarchical, or object-oriented.
The physical database designer decides how the logical database design is to be 
physically realized. This involves:
•	 mapping the logical database design into a set of tables and integrity constraints;
• selecting specific storage structures and access methods for the data to achieve 
good performance;
• designing any security measures required on the data.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   70 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 20 ---
1.5 History of Database Management Systems | 71
Many parts of physical database design are highly dependent on the target DBMS, 
and there may be more than one way of implementing a mechanism. Consequently, 
the physical database designer must be fully aware of the functionality of the target 
DBMS and must understand the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative 
implementation. The physical database designer must be capable of selecting a suit-
able storage strategy that takes account of usage. Whereas conceptual and logical 
database design are concerned with the what, physical database design is concerned 
with the how. It requires different skills, which are often found in different people. 
We present a methodology for conceptual database design in Chapter 16, for logi-
cal database design in Chapter 17, and for physical database design in Chapters 
18 and 19.
1.4.3 Application Developers
Once the database has been implemented, the application programs that provide 
the required functionality for the end-users must be implemented. This is the 
responsibility of the application developers. Typically, the application developers 
work from a specification produced by systems analysts. Each program contains 
statements that request the DBMS to perform some operation on the database, 
which includes retrieving data, inserting, updating, and deleting data. The pro-
grams may be written in a third-generation or fourth-generation programming 
language, as discussed previously.
1.4.4 End-Users
The end-users are the “clients” of the database, which has been designed and 
implemented and is being maintained to serve their information needs. End-users 
can be classified according to the way they use the system:
• Naïve users are typically unaware of the DBMS. They access the database through 
specially written application programs that attempt to make the operations as 
simple as possible. They invoke database operations by entering simple com-
mands or choosing options from a menu. This means that they do not need to 
know anything about the database or the DBMS. For example, the checkout 
assistant at the local supermarket uses a bar code reader to find out the price of 
the item. However, there is an application program present that reads the bar 
code, looks up the price of the item in the database, reduces the database field 
containing the number of such items in stock, and displays the price on the till.
• Sophisticated users. At the other end of the spectrum, the sophisticated end-user 
is familiar with the structure of the database and the facilities offered by the 
DBMS. Sophisticated end-users may use a high-level query language such as SQL 
to perform the required operations. Some sophisticated end-users may even write 
application programs for their own use.
1.5 History of Database Management Systems
We have already seen that the predecessor to the DBMS was the file-based sys-
tem. However, there was never a time when the database approach began and 
the file-based system ceased. In fact, the file-based system still exists in specific 
areas. It has been suggested that the DBMS has its roots in the 1960s Apollo 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   71 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 21 ---
72 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
moon-landing project, which was initiated in response to President Kennedy’s 
objective of landing a man on the moon by the end of that decade. At that time, 
there was no system available that would be able to handle and manage the vast 
amounts of information that the project would generate.
As a result, North American Aviation (NAA, now Rockwell International), 
the prime contractor for the project, developed software known as GUAM (for 
Generalized Update Access Method). GUAM was based on the concept that smaller 
components come together as parts of larger components, and so on, until the 
final product is assembled. This structure, which conforms to an upside-down tree, 
is also known as a hierarchical structure. In the mid-1960s, IBM joined NAA to 
develop GUAM into what is now known as IMS (for Information Management 
System). The reason that IBM restricted IMS to the management of hierarchies of 
records was to allow the use of serial storage devices; most notably magnetic tape, 
which was a market requirement at that time. This restriction was subsequently 
dropped. Although one of the earliest commercial DBMSs, IMS is still the main 
hierarchical DBMS used by most large mainframe installations.
In the mid-1960s, another significant development was the emergence of IDS (or 
Integrated Data Store) from General Electric. This work was headed by one of the 
early pioneers of database systems, Charles Bachmann. This development led to a 
new type of database system known as the network DBMS, which had a profound 
effect on the information systems of that generation. The network database was 
developed partly to address the need to represent more complex data relationships 
than could be modeled with hierarchical structures, and partly to impose a data-
base standard. To help establish such standards, the Conference on Data Systems 
Languages (CODASYL), comprising representatives of the U.S. government and 
the world of business and commerce, formed a List Processing Task Force in 1965, 
subsequently renamed the Data Base Task Group (DBTG) in 1967. The terms of 
reference for the DBTG were to define standard specifications for an environment 
that would allow database creation and data manipulation. A draft report was issued 
in 1969, and the first definitive report was issued in 1971. The DBTG proposal 
identified three components:
• the network schema—the logical organization of the entire database as seen by 
the DBA—which includes a definition of the database name, the type of each 
record, and the components of each record type;
• the subschema—the part of the database as seen by the user or application program;
• a data management language to define the data characteristics and the data 
structure, and to manipulate the data.
For standardization, the DBTG specified three distinct languages:
• a schema DDL, which enables the DBA to define the schema;
• a subschema DDL, which allows the application programs to define the parts of 
the database they require;
• a DML, to manipulate the data.
Although the report was not formally adopted by the American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), a number of systems were subsequently developed following the DBTG 
proposal. These systems are now known as CODASYL or DBTG systems. The 
CODASYL and hierarchical approaches represented the first generation of DBMSs. 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   72 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 22 ---
1.5 History of Database Management Systems | 73
We look more closely at these systems on the Web site for this book (see the Preface 
for the URL). However, these two models have some fundamental disadvantages:
• complex programs have to be written to answer even simple queries based on 
navigational record-oriented access;
• there is minimal data independence;
• there is no widely accepted theoretical foundation.
In 1970, E. F. Codd of the IBM Research Laboratory produced his highly influ-
ential paper on the relational data model (“A relational model of data for large 
shared data banks,” Codd, 1970). This paper was very timely and addressed the 
disadvantages of the former approaches. Many experimental relational DBMSs 
were implemented thereafter, with the first commercial products appearing in the 
late 1970s and early 1980s. Of particular note is the System R project at IBM’s San 
José Research Laboratory in California, which was developed during the late 1970s 
(Astrahan et al., 1976). This project was designed to prove the practicality of the 
relational model by providing an implementation of its data structures and opera-
tions, and led to two major developments:
• the development of a structured query language called SQL, which has since 
become the standard language for relational DBMSs;
• the production of various commercial relational DBMS products during the 1980s, 
for example DB2 and SQL/DS from IBM and Oracle from Oracle Corporation.
Now there are several hundred relational DBMSs for both mainframe and PC envi-
ronments, though many are stretching the definition of the relational model. Other 
examples of multi-user relational DBMSs are MySQL from Oracle Corporation, 
Ingres from Actian Corporation, SQL Server from Microsoft, and Informix from 
IBM. Examples of PC-based relational DBMSs are Office Access and Visual FoxPro 
from Microsoft, Interbase from Embarcadero Technologies, and R:Base from 
R:Base Technologies. Relational DBMSs are referred to as second-generation 
DBMSs. We discuss the relational data model in Chapter 4.
The relational model is not without its failings; in particular, its limited modeling 
capabilities. There has been much research since then attempting to address this 
problem. In 1976, Chen presented the Entity–Relationship model, which is now a 
widely accepted technique for database design and the basis for the methodology 
presented in Chapters 16 and 17 of this book. In 1979, Codd himself attempted to 
address some of the failings in his original work with an extended version of the 
relational model called RM/T (1979) and subsequently RM/V2 (1990). The attempts 
to provide a data model that represents the “real world” more closely have been 
loosely classified as semantic data modeling.
In response to the increasing complexity of database applications, two “new” 
systems have emerged: the object-oriented DBMS (OODBMS) and the object-
relational DBMS (ORDBMS). However, unlike previous models, the actual com-
position of these models is not clear. This evolution represents third-generation 
DBMSs, which we discuss in Chapters 9 and 27–28.
The 1990s also saw the rise of the Internet, the three-tier client-server archi-
tecture, and the demand to allow corporate databases to be integrated with Web 
applications. The late 1990s saw the development of XML (eXtensible Markup 
Language), which has had a profound effect on many aspects of IT, including 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   73 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 23 ---
74 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
database integration, graphical interfaces, embedded systems, distributed systems, 
and database systems. We will discuss Web–database integration and XML in 
Chapters 29–30.
Specialized DBMSs have also been created, such as data warehouses, which can 
store data drawn from several data sources, possibly maintained by different oper-
ating units of an organization. Such systems provide comprehensive data analysis 
facilities to allow strategic decisions to be made based on, for example, histori-
cal trends. All the major DBMS vendors provide data warehousing solutions. We 
discuss data warehouses in Chapters 31–32. Another example is the enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) system, an application layer built on top of a DBMS that 
integrates all the business functions of an organization, such as manufacturing, 
sales, finance, marketing, shipping, invoicing, and human resources. Popular ERP 
systems are SAP R/3 from SAP and PeopleSoft from Oracle. Figure 1.10 provides a 
summary of historical development of database systems.
TIMeFRaMe DeVelOPMeNT COMMeNTS
1960s (onwards) File-based systems Precursor to the database system. Decentralized approach: each 
department stored and controlled its own data.
Mid-1960s hierarchical and 
network data 
models
Represents first-generation DBMSs. Main hierarchical system is IMS  
from IBM and the main network system is IDMS/R from Computer 
 Associates. Lacked data independence and required complex 
programs to be developed to process the data.
1970 Relational model 
proposed
Publication of e. F. Codd’s seminal paper “A relational model of 
data for large shared data banks,” which addresses the weaknesses  
of first-generation systems.
1970s Prototype RDBMSs 
developed
During this period, two main prototypes emerged: the Ingres 
project at the University of California at Berkeley (started in 1970) 
and the System R project at IBM’s San José Research Laboratory in 
California (started in 1974), which led to the development of SQL.
1976 eR model proposed Publication of Chen’s paper “The entity-Relationship model—
Toward a unified view of data.” eR modeling becomes a significant 
component in methodologies for database design.
1979 Commercial 
RDBMSs appear
Commercial RDBMSs like Oracle, Ingres, and DB2 appear. These 
represent the second generation of DBMSs.
1987 ISO SQL standard SQL is standardized by the ISO (International Standards Organization). 
There are subsequent releases of the standard in 1989, 1992 (SQL2), 
1999 (SQL:1999), 2003 (SQL:2003), 2008 (SQL:2008), and  
2011 (SQL:2011).
1990s OODBMS and 
ORDBMSs appear
This period initially sees the emergence of OODBMSs and later 
ORDBMSs (Oracle 8, with object features released in 1997).
1990s Data warehousing 
systems appear
This period also see releases from the major DBMS vendors of 
data warehousing systems and thereafter data mining products.
Mid-1990s Web–database 
integration
The first Internet database applications appear. DBMS vendors and 
third-party vendors recognize the significance of the Internet and 
support web–database integration.
1998 XML XML 1.0 ratified by the W3C. XML becomes integrated with 
DBMS products and native XML databases are developed.
Figure 1.10  historical development of database systems.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   74 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 24 ---
1.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of DBMSs | 75
1.6 advantages and Disadvantages of DBMSs
The database management system has promising potential advantages. 
Unfortunately, there are also disadvantages. In this section, we examine these 
advantages and disadvantages.
advantages
The advantages of database management systems are listed in Table 1.2.
Control of data redundancy  As we discussed in Section 1.2, traditional file-based 
systems waste space by storing the same information in more than one file. For 
example, in Figure 1.5, we stored similar data for properties for rent and clients 
in both the Sales and Contracts Departments. In contrast, the database approach 
attempts to eliminate the redundancy by integrating the files so that multiple 
copies of the same data are not stored. However, the database approach does not 
eliminate redundancy entirely, but controls the amount of redundancy inherent in 
the database. Sometimes it is necessary to duplicate key data items to model rela-
tionships; at other times, it is desirable to duplicate some data items to improve 
performance. The reasons for controlled duplication will become clearer as you 
read the next few chapters.
Data consistency  By eliminating or controlling redundancy, we reduce the risk of 
inconsistencies occurring. If a data item is stored only once in the database, any update to 
its value has to be performed only once and the new value is available immediately 
to all users. If a data item is stored more than once and the system is aware of this, 
the system can ensure that all copies of the item are kept consistent. Unfortunately, 
many of today’s DBMSs do not automatically ensure this type of consistency.
More information from the same amount of data  With the integration of the 
operational data, it may be possible for the organization to derive additional 
information from the same data. For example, in the file-based system illustrated 
in Figure 1.5, the Contracts Department does not know who owns a leased prop-
erty. Similarly, the Sales Department has no knowledge of lease details. When we 
TaBle 1.2   Advantages of DBMSs.
Control of data redundancy economy of scale
Data consistency Balance of conflicting requirements
More information from the same 
amount of data
Improved data accessibility and responsiveness
Sharing of data Increased productivity
Improved data integrity Improved maintenance through data independence
Improved security Increased concurrency
enforcement of standards Improved backup and recovery services
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   75 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 25 ---
76 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
integrate these files, the Contracts Department has access to owner details and the 
Sales Department has access to lease details. We may now be able to derive more 
information from the same amount of data.
Sharing of data  Typically, files are owned by the people or departments that use 
them. On the other hand, the database belongs to the entire organization and can 
be shared by all authorized users. In this way, more users share more of the data. 
Furthermore, new applications can build on the existing data in the database and 
add only data that is not currently stored, rather than having to define all data 
requirements again. The new applications can also rely on the functions provided 
by the DBMS, such as data definition and manipulation, and concurrency and 
recovery control, rather than having to provide these functions themselves.
Improved data integrity  Database integrity refers to the validity and consistency 
of stored data. Integrity is usually expressed in terms of constraints, which are con-
sistency rules that the database is not permitted to violate. Constraints may apply to 
data items within a single record or to relationships between records. For example, 
an integrity constraint could state that a member of staff’s salary cannot be greater 
than $40,000 or that the branch number contained in a staff record, representing 
the branch where the member of staff works, must correspond to an existing branch 
office. Again, integration allows the DBA to define integrity constraints, and the 
DBMS to enforce them.
Improved security  Database security is the protection of the database from unau-
thorized users. Without suitable security measures, integration makes the data more 
vulnerable than file-based systems. However, integration allows the DBA to define 
database security, and the DBMS to enforce it. This security may take the form of 
user names and passwords to identify people authorized to use the database. The 
access that an authorized user is allowed on the data may be restricted by the opera-
tion type (retrieval, insert, update, delete). For example, the DBA has access to all 
the data in the database; a branch manager may have access to all data that relates 
to his or her branch office; and a sales assistant may have access to all data relating 
to properties but no access to sensitive data such as staff salary details.
enforcement of standards  Again, integration allows the DBA to define and 
the DBMS to enforce the necessary standards. These may include departmental, 
organizational, national, or international standards for such things as data formats 
to facilitate exchange of data between systems, naming conventions, documentation 
standards, update procedures, and access rules.
economy of scale  Combining all the organization’s operational data into one 
database and creating a set of applications that work on this one source of data can 
result in cost savings. In this case, the budget that would normally be allocated to 
each department for the development and maintenance of its file-based system can 
be combined, possibly resulting in a lower total cost, leading to an economy of scale. 
The combined budget can be used to buy a system configuration that is more suited 
to the organization’s needs. This may consist of one large, powerful computer or a 
network of smaller computers.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   76 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 26 ---
1.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of DBMSs | 77
Balance of conflicting requirements  Each user or department has needs that 
may be in conflict with the needs of other users. Because the database is under the 
control of the DBA, the DBA can make decisions about the design and operational 
use of the database that provide the best use of resources for the organization as 
a whole. These decisions will provide optimal performance for important applica-
tions, possibly at the expense of less-critical ones.
Improved data accessibility and responsiveness  Again, as a result of integra-
tion, data that crosses departmental boundaries is directly accessible to the end-
users. This provides a system with potentially much more functionality that can, for 
example, be used to provide better services to the end-user or the organization’s 
clients. Many DBMSs provide query languages or report writers that allow users to 
ask ad hoc questions and to obtain the required information almost immediately at 
their terminal, without requiring a programmer to write some software to extract 
this information from the database. For example, a branch manager could list all 
flats with a monthly rent greater than £400 by entering the following SQL com-
mand at a terminal:
SELECT *
FROM 
PropertyForRent
WHERE type 5 ‘Flat’ AND rent . 400;
Increased productivity  As mentioned previously, the DBMS provides many of 
the standard functions that the programmer would normally have to write in a file-
based application. At a basic level, the DBMS provides all the low-level file-handling 
routines that are typical in application programs. The provision of these functions 
allows the programmer to concentrate on the specific functionality required by the 
users without having to worry about low-level implementation details. Many DBMSs 
also provide a fourth-generation environment, consisting of tools to simplify the 
development of database applications. This results in increased programmer pro-
ductivity and reduced development time (with associated cost savings).
Improved maintenance through data independence  In file-based systems, the 
descriptions of the data and the logic for accessing the data are built into each 
application program, making the programs dependent on the data. A change to 
the structure of the data—such as making an address 41 characters instead of 40 
characters, or a change to the way the data is stored on disk—can require sub-
stantial alterations to the programs that are affected by the change. In contrast, 
a DBMS separates the data descriptions from the applications, thereby making 
applications immune to changes in the data descriptions. This is known as data 
independence and is discussed further in Section 2.1.5. The provision of data 
independence simplifies database application maintenance.
Increased concurrency  In some file-based systems, if two or more users are 
allowed to access the same file simultaneously, it is possible that the accesses will 
interfere with each other, resulting in loss of information or even loss of integrity. 
Many DBMSs manage concurrent database access and ensure that such problems 
cannot occur. We discuss concurrency control in Chapter 22.
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   77 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 27 ---
78 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
Improved backup and recovery services  Many file-based systems place the 
responsibility on the user to provide measures to protect the data from failures 
to the computer system or application program. This may involve performing 
a nightly backup of the data. In the event of a failure during the next day, the 
backup is restored and the work that has taken place since this backup is lost and 
has to be re-entered. In contrast, modern DBMSs provide facilities to minimize the 
amount of processing that is lost following a failure. We discuss database recovery 
in Section 22.3.
Disadvantages
The disadvantages of the database approach are summarized in Table 1.3.
Complexity  The provision of the functionality that we expect of a good DBMS 
makes the DBMS an extremely complex piece of software. Database designers and 
developers, data and database administrators, and end-users must understand this 
functionality to take full advantage of it. Failure to understand the system can lead 
to bad design decisions, which can have serious consequences for an organization.
Size  The complexity and breadth of functionality makes the DBMS an extremely 
large piece of software, occupying many megabytes of disk space and requiring 
substantial amounts of memory to run efficiently.
Cost of DBMSs  The cost of DBMSs varies significantly, depending on the envi-
ronment and functionality provided. For example, a single-user DBMS for a per-
sonal computer may only cost $100. However, a large mainframe multi-user DBMS 
servicing hundreds of users can be extremely expensive, perhaps $100,000 or even 
$1,000,000. There is also the recurrent annual maintenance cost, which is typically 
a percentage of the list price.
additional hardware costs  The disk storage requirements for the DBMS and the 
database may necessitate the purchase of additional storage space. Furthermore, 
to achieve the required performance, it may be necessary to purchase a larger 
machine, perhaps even a machine dedicated to running the DBMS. The procure-
ment of additional hardware results in further expenditure.
TaBle 1.3  Disadvantages of DBMSs.
Complexity
Size
Cost of DBMSs
Additional hardware costs
Cost of conversion
Performance
Greater impact of a failure
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   78 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 28 ---
Chapter Summary | 79
Cost of conversion  In some situations, the cost of the DBMS and extra hardware 
may be relatively small compared with the cost of converting existing applications 
to run on the new DBMS and hardware. This cost also includes the cost of training 
staff to use these new systems, and possibly the employment of specialist staff to 
help with the conversion and running of the systems. This cost is one of the main 
reasons why some organizations feel tied to their current systems and cannot switch 
to more modern database technology. The term legacy system is sometimes used 
to refer to an older, and usually inferior, system.
Performance  Typically, a file-based system is written for a specific application, 
such as invoicing. As a result, performance is generally very good. However, the 
DBMS is written to be more general, to cater for many applications rather than just 
one. The result is that some applications may not run as fast as they used to.
Greater impact of a failure  The centralization of resources increases the vulner-
ability of the system. Because all users and applications rely on the availability of the 
DBMS, the failure of certain components can bring operations to a halt.
Chapter Summary
• The Database Management System (DBMS) is now the underlying framework of the information system 
and has fundamentally changed the way in which many organizations operate. The database system remains a 
very active research area and many significant problems remain.
• The predecessor to the DBMS was the file-based system, which is a collection of application programs that 
perform services for the end-users, usually the production of reports. each program defines and manages its own 
data. Although the file-based system was a great improvement over the manual filing system, it still has significant 
problems, mainly the amount of data redundancy present and program—data dependence.
• The database approach emerged to resolve the problems with the file-based approach. A database is a shared 
collection of logically related data and a description of this data, designed to meet the information needs of an 
organization. A DBMS is a software system that enables users to define, create, maintain, and control access 
to the database. An application program is a computer program that interacts with the database by issuing 
an appropriate request (typically a SQL statement) to the DBMS. The more inclusive term database system 
is used to define a collection of application programs that interact with the database along with the DBMS and 
database itself.
• All access to the database is through the DBMS. The DBMS provides a Data Definition language (DDl), 
which allows users to define the database, and a Data Manipulation language (DMl), which allows users 
to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data from the database.
• The DBMS provides controlled access to the database. It provides security, integrity, concurrency and recovery 
control, and a user-accessible catalog. It also provides a view mechanism to simplify the data that users have to 
deal with.
• The DBMS environment consists of hardware (the computer), software (the DBMS, operating system, and appli-
cations programs), data, procedures, and people. The people include data and database administrators, database 
designers, application developers, and end-users.
• The roots of the DBMS lie in file-based systems. The hierarchical and CODASYL systems represent the first 
generation of DBMSs. The hierarchical model is typified by IMS (Information Management System) and the 
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   79 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

--- PAGE 29 ---
network or CODaSYl model by IDS (Integrated Data Store), both developed in the mid-1960s. The 
 relational model, proposed by e. F. Codd in 1970, represents the second generation of DBMSs. It has had a  
fundamental effect on the DBMS community and there are now over one hundred relational DBMSs. The third  
generation of DBMSs are represented by the Object-Relational DBMS and the Object-Oriented DBMS.
• Some advantages of the database approach include control of data redundancy, data consistency, sharing of 
data, and improved security and integrity. Some disadvantages include complexity, cost, reduced performance, 
and higher impact of a failure.
Review Questions
 1.1 List four government sectors in your country that use database systems..
  1.2 Discuss each of the following terms:
(a) data
(b) database
(c) database management system
(d) database application program
(e) data independence
(f) security
(g) integrity
(h) views
  1.3 Describe the role of database management systems (DBMS) in the database approach. Discuss why knowledge of 
DBMS is important for database administrators.
  
1.4 Describe the main characteristics of the database approach and contrast it with the file-based approach.
  1.5 Describe the five components of the DBMS environment and discuss how they relate to each other.
  1.6 Discuss the roles of the following personnel in the database environment:
(a) data administrator
(b) database administrator
(c) logical database designer
(d) physical database designer
(e) application developer
(f)  end-users
 1.7 Discuss the three generations of DBMSs.
 1.8 Why are views an important aspect of database management systems?
exercises
  1.9  Interview some users of database systems. Which DBMS features do they find most useful and why? Which DBMS 
facilities do they find least useful and why? What do these users perceive to be the advantages and  
disadvantages of the DBMS?
 1.10   A database approach addresses several of the problems and challenges associated with the traditional file-based 
approach. Using a DBMS to control how data is shared with different applications and users, through applications 
such as views, has a number of advantages. however, the implementation of a database approach has its own 
80 | Chapter 1  Introduction to Databases
M01_CONN3067_06_SE_C01.indd   80 10/06/14   4:09 PM
www.EBooksWorld.ir

